# Hard Disk Failure Prediction on Highly Imbalanced Data Using LSTM Network

## Abstract  
<p align="justify">The recent increase in demand for data storage systems has subsequently led to the increase in the number of hard disks failure prediction works in this field. Although most of the existing works in this area have succeeded in achieving a good prediction accuracy, some of them utilize other attributes that are not universally accessible and there is no mention of any methods used to deal with the imbalance nature of the hard disk failure data. Therefore, this project aims to create an accurate prediction method using only the S.M.A.R.T attributes which are highly accessible from an open source such as Backblaze while attempt to mitigate the issues caused by the highly imbalanced data through the implementation of various sampling methods. To achieve these aims, LSTM prediction models are built within an R environment using the Backblaze open-source data as a foundation while also experimenting with various sampling methods to deal with the imbalanced nature of the data set. Evaluating all the potential models using Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) as the evaluation metric, the LSTM model that utilized the partial undersampling method achieved the best score of 0.71. Although this score might appear relatively low compared to other previous works, the emphasis on solving the imbalanced nature of the data combined and providing a more universally applicable model will be beneficial to a wider range of audience.</p>  
  
## Introduction 

<p align="justify">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The exponential increase of the amount of available data and its utilization throughout all fields of business and services, has subsequently led to the rise of demand and popularity of data storage systems. Data storage systems act as the main pillar for data utilization and currently, most of the data that are available are stored within magnetic disks which are dominated by Hard Disk drives (Pinheiro et al., 2007). Being the pillar that supports the utilization of data, a downtime of this system could be detrimental to the business, as one study group suggest that revenue loss due to a downtime of such an imperative system averaged around $70,000 per hour for a mid-size company and it could get even higher for larger companies (Boggs & Bozman, 2009). Therefore, the ability to predict when such failure would occur is crucial to minimize loss. </p>  
<p align="justify">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Throughout the years there have been several works and currently increasing in numbers that focus on creating an effective and accurate prediction model for hard disk failure (Lu et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2021; Tomer et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Chaves et al., 2018; Shen et al., 2021; Pinheiro et al., 2007; Yu, 2019; Rincón et al., 2017; He et al., 2020; Mittman et al., 2019; Kesavan & Mahamuni, 2021). Most of the prediction models utilize Self-Monitoring Analysis and Reporting Technology (S.M.A.R.T) attributes from each hard drive to produce a prediction model. However, there are some instances in which external parameters such as the location of the hard drive and performance metrics are utilized to enhance the prediction accuracy (Lu et al., 2020).</p>   
<p align="justify">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Most of the existing prediction models have achieved high accuracy in predicting failures of hard disks through the various implementation and combination of both deep learning and machine learning. However, there is currently no record that shows the implementation of various imputation methods to further enhance the accuracy of the prediction model. Therefore, this project aims to produce an enhanced prediction model while also investigating the effect of various imputation methods on prediction accuracy.</p>  

## Running the Analyses

Steps Required to Run the Analyses:  
  * Run project template
  * Run the analyses files in src folder. Select the sampling methods used based on the files. Use Normal for using raw data
  * All the necessary functions and its description are listed in the munge files. Munge files also contained the necessary initial eda performed in this project
  * Modify the desired observations length as the function is made to take into consideration (observation windows and prediction window)
